---
layout: page
permalink: /bio213_notes/
---

**BIO 213 Notes**
----------------

What is Life?
1. Organization
2. Energy
3. Homeostatsis
4. Reproduction and Development
5. Evolution

Cell: Basic unit of life. Organisms consist of one or more cells
Coding instructions are written in nucelic acids: DNA or RNA

Can we create life synthetically? Yes we can
Synthetic Genomics: may 19, 2010, first gentically created bacteria

1. Life uses Organization
Emergent properties start at any level
Atom: protons, neutrons, electonrs
Molecule: Joined atoms
Organnelle: Many molecules to create a structure
Cell: Multiple organelles; fundamental unit of life
Tissue: Collection of specialized cells
Organ: Multiple tissues (a leaf is an organ)
Organ System: Multiple orgns maintain homeostasis
Organism
Population: Multiple organisms
Community: Multiple populations
Ecosystem
Biosphere

Emergent Properties: Complex functions arise at each level of biological organization

2. Life requires Energy
All energy comes directly or indirectly from the sun (with the exception of certain bacteria the harness geothermal sources)
Producers: Extract energy from the nonliving environment to create high energy molecules.
Consumers: Eat producers or other consumers
Deomposers: Eat dead organisms and convert them into nutrients
Heat tax: A portion of energy is lost every time is transferred from organism to another

3. Life maintains homeostasis
Hot - Sweat; evaporative cooling
Cold - Shiver; produces heat by muscle contraction
Maintaining internal conditions (equilbrium)

4. Life Reproduces and Develops
Two types of reproduction

Asexual

Pro: Cheap and quick. As long as the organism is capable of reproduction, it will reproduce
Con: Offspring are genetically identical and vulerable to viruses

Sexual
Pro: Mix and match genetic material as a guard against virus and chemical threats
Con: Energy intensive

5. Life Evolves
Mutation and evolution: adaptation
1. Spontaneous Mutation
2. Selection pressure gives the mutated organism an advantage

Taxonomy - Science of classifying life
Domains
1. Bacteria
2. Archaea
3. Eukarya
Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, Species

For this class we refer to organisms by their genus and species

The Chemistry of Life
Organisms are made up 118 elements known to exist
25 are essential to life
Bulk elements make up the vast majority of every cell
Trace elements are scarce

Question most likely on the exam: By mass we are oxygen
followed by carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen

Atom - smallest unit that retains the characteristics of that element

Isotope = Any of the different forms of the same element, distinguished by the number of neutrons

Covalent Bond: Sharing electrons (H - H)
Ionic Bond: One atom donates an electron to another (NaCl)
Hydrogen Bond: Like a magnet. 10% as strong as covalent

Molecules and compounds are not alive, but they are used to maintain life
1. Ethanol: Single carbon single bond
2. Ethylene Carbon-Carbon double bond
3. Acetlene carbon-carbon-carbon triple bond

1. Dehydration Synthesis - Create molecules
2. Hydrolysis - Breaking down molecules; "Cut using water"

Water is cohesive - surface tension and a solvent 

Table salt dissociates in water, sugar dissolves

Water regulates temperature allowing for homeostasis
Water expands as it freezes into a tetrahedral array

Carbon based organic molecules are essential to life

Polymers are use to make macro molecules
Carbohydrates: Energy storage, structure
Lipids: Hydropobic, membranes, energy storage, signaling
Proteins: Strucutre, locomtion, transport, storage, catalysis
Nucleic Acids: Information storage and transmission

Carbohydrates: Sugars, monosaccharides
Most common is glucose (C6 H12 O6). Other common ribose (C5 H10 O5) and fructose (C6 H12 O6)

Glucose + Fructose = Sucrose

Polysaccharides
Cellose - structure in plants (polymerized glucose)
Starch - long term storage in plants
Glycogen - short term energy storage in animals (longer than ATP storage)

Lipids
All hydrophobic and do not dissolve, non polar 
Fats - Fatty Acids
Triglycerides - Energy storage
Unsaturated fats, moved by lipoproteins

Trans Fats will bond to the arterial walls

Cholesterol -> precursor to horomones, used in membrane structure

Proteins: Complex and versitile
A protein is a chain of amino acids held together by peptide bonds to form one or more polypeptides

There are 20 naturally occurring amino acids. We can't make all of them and must ingest essential amino acids from our diet

Protein shape is critical for function
Primary Structure - Linear sequence of amino acids, peoptide bonds are capale of hydrogen bonds
Secondary Structure - Localized areas of coils
Tertiary Structure
Quaternary Structure - Overall shape
Proteins are vulerable to heat, pH, salts that can denature them and render them nonfunctional

Nucleic Acids: Information Storage
Nucleotide monomers make DNA and RNA - Sugar, base, phospate
Adenine (A) pairs with T or U
Cytosine (C) pairs with G
Thymine (T) pairs with A (Use in DNA)
Uracil (U) pairs with A (Used in RNA

DNA is the data storage moelcule of life
RNA is the utilization of the genetic information stored in DNA

Energy is the capcity to do work
Potential energy - Chemical energy, conentration gradient (over a semipermeable membrane)
Kinetic Energy - Light, sound, movement of atoms and muscles
Joules (J) calories (1 cal = 4.184 J) or nutritional calores (1 Cal = 1kcal)
1 Cal is roughly the equivalent of one punch in the face

Energy in Biology is converted from one form to another 
Radiant Energy (from the sun) -> Photosynthsis (Potential Energy) -> Cellular Respiration 

Plants do both photosynthesis (during the day) and cellular respiration (during the night)

Metabolism is the general term for all chemical reactions in an organism
Anabolic - Build up of molecules. Photosynthesis, endothermic
Catabolic - Breaking down, cellular respiration, exothermic

Photosynthesis
6 CO2 + 6H20 -> C6H12O6 + 6 O2

Cellular Respiration
C6H12O6 + 6 O2 -> 6 CO2 + 6H20

All the energy stored in a molecule is not released all at once. Instead energy is liberated by successive redox reactions in an electron transport chain

Energy stored as chemical potential in the bonds of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Analogous to the coils of spring being compressed
ATP is not stable, but good enough for transport to location where energy is needed
This makes ATP the currency of energy

Cells use ATP as energy by phosphorlating molecules 

Concentration Gradient
1. Use by letting moelcues flow down (like a water mill)
2. Restore the gradient by pumping solutes against the gradient

While in a coma, roughly 2 billion ATP burned per minute just to stay alive
Regular life probably uses between 5-10 billion per minute

ATP is the driving force behind enzyme reactions
Enzyes are biocatalysts that reduce the activation energy for biochemical reactions
Lowering the activation energy speeds up the rate of reactions

Enzymes provide active sites where substrates bind

Enzymes are highly regulated via negative feedback
Noncompetitve inhibition
Competitive inhibition

Enzymes are sensitive to conditions within the cell

Thermus aquatics, functions in high temperatures and lead to development of the DNA amplication process

Membranes are selectively permeable in order to maintain molecule concentrations
Passive transport - Use energy in gradient, no energy input
Simple diffusion - substance moves across membrane without protein
Osmosis - Water diffuses across a selective membrane
Facilitated Diffusion - Transport proteins

Active Transport Requires input energy to create and maintain concentration gradient. Either pumping sodium out or potaassium in

Endocytosis - Vexicles going in
Phagocytosis - eating another cell; Cellular eating
Exocytosis - Vesicles going out
All three are energy intensive

